4. Discussion VDACs are important proteins of the outer mitochondrial membrane with high abundance and involvement in multiple functions, which include metabolite shuttling, mitochondrial protein import, and formation of membrane contacts. Mammalian VDACs have further been linked to carcinogenesis, which highlights their importance and focused interest as a current research subject. Here, we show that the yeast VDAC Por1 controls lipid homeostasis and suggest a causal link to the regulation of autophagy. POR1 deletion decreased basic autophagy levels and reduced the susceptibility to autophagy induction by rapamycin and nitrogen starvation. POR1 deletion further triggered vacuole dysfunction, which could causally link to autophagy impairment in por1∆, as vacuole function is absolutely required for autophagy. Vacuole dysfunction itself could be a direct cause of altered lipid metabolism, or due to changes in signalling. The yeast AMPK orthologue Snf1 kinase, for example, has been connected to porins in yeast. Another possible signalling candidate is the MAPKinase Slt2, which has been linked to vacuole function. Whether or not these signalling routes are involved in Por1-regulated vacuole function and autophagy needs to be addressed in future experiments. Our lipidomic analysis revealed significant changes in key phospholipids when comparing por1∆ and wildtype (Figure 3 and Figure S3). In fact, the three CL precursors DG, PA, and PG are highly upregulated in por1∆ (Figure 3b), which might represent a compensation pattern for the lack of CL. The fact that DG levels are not as highly increased, as compared to the relative increase in PA and PG, suggests that mitochondrial CL synthesis occurs predominantly through the Ups2–Mdm35 independent route, consuming DG under these conditions. Thus, PA and PG are upregulated, but accumulate as they are not consumed for mitochondrial CL synthesis. Our analysis further showed that POR1 deficiency reduces total PE levels (Figure 3). A reduction in cellular PE might, thus, be causally linked to the decreased autophagic capacity as measured for por1∆ (Figure 1 and Figure 2). We reasoned that Por1 could either function in PS transfer from ER to mitochondria itself or be required for mitochondrial import of Psd1 or the Ups machinery required for phospholipid import through the inner mitochondrial membrane. Interestingly, Por1 has recently been reported to interact with Mdm35 and to be implicated in mitochondrial lipid homeostasis. Two other recent publications further suggest a role for porin in mitochondrial import, which represents another possible line of explanation for its effects on autophagy. A study in acute myeloid leukaemia cells suggests that mitochondria can control autophagy through the regulation of VDAC-involving mitochondria–endoplasmic reticulum contact sites (MERCs) to fine-tune lipid degradation. Interestingly, Acc1, as well as Fas1, have been identified as crucial players in extending the autophagosomal membrane by de novo phospholipid synthesis during autophagy. Schütter et al. suggest a new model of autophagosomal membrane extension involving localisation of Fas1 to the phagophore assembly site (PAS), which, in turn, drives FA synthesis and channels them into the ER. Increased FA abundance in the ER then triggers phospholipid synthesis, which are channelled back to the PAS via the Atg2/Atg18 complex to fuel autophagosomal membrane growth. Mitochondria and the ER exchange PS and PA via membrane contact sites. There is no evidence, so far, that PE is also channelled back from mitochondria to the ER. Recent advances suggest that PE might be directly synthesised in the ER, which is achieved by Psd1 translocation to the ER. Autophagosomes are mainly composed of PC (38%), PI (37%), and PE (19%). The novel mechanism that autophagosomal membrane growth relies on de novo phospholipid synthesis in the ER requires PE supply by either Psd1 activity or via the ethanolamine-dependent salvage pathway (Kennedy pathway). PSD1 overexpression has been shown to increase the autophagic capacity, whereas knockout of PSD1 and PSD2 resulted in reduced autophagy. PSD1 and PSD2 single mutants have been studied regarding their role in mitophagy, as discussed later. Since Psd1 accounts for 70–80% of total PSD activity in yeast, it can be assumed to be of predominant importance for autophagy. Still, the question remains whether and how the different pathways of PE synthesis offer redundancy regarding their role in autophagy and if they can compensate for each other. A Psd1-dependent raise in PE at the ER could, in principle, be achieved in two ways: either (i) producing PE in the mitochondria and then channelling it to the ER, or (ii) by targeting Psd1 itself to the ER. Friedmann et al. have shown that a subfraction of Psd1 indeed localises to the ER upon PE starvation. Induction of autophagy by rapamycin treatment or nitrogen starvation is likely to induce such PE starvation conditions, triggering ER targeting of Psd1. Since POR1 deletion has been associated with reduced efficiency in mitochondrial protein import, Psd1 uptake into mitochondria might be reduced as well. This hypothesis is supported by our anti-Psd1 immunoblots, suggesting decreased proteolytic activation of Psd1 (Figure S4b,c) in por1∆. Another recent study investigated the involvement of Psd1 during mitophagy in yeast. Interestingly, the study reports that Psd1 is predominantly involved in nitrogen-starvation-induced mitophagy, whereas Psd2 is required for mitophagy induction in the stationary phase. The authors further suggest that defective mitophagy in psd1∆ is due to impaired recruitment of Atg8 to mitochondria. Even though we did not investigate specific forms of autophagy, such as mitophagy, here, our findings of porin 1 involvement in autophagy and its relation to Psd1 function are compatible with the results from Vigié et al. For future research, it remains to be investigated whether porin function is needed for the extension of autophagosomal membranes or, rather, at the step of autophagy initiation/PAS formation. Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.