Discussion MLC1 (the main gene involved in MLC) encodes an astrocyte-specific protein located in perivascular astrocytic processes, where it forms a junctional complex with GlialCAM. Our previous research showed that, in the mouse, the MLC1/GlialCAM complex forms progressively after birth (between P5 and P15). Our present work demonstrated for the first time that the P5–P15 time window is also important for the formation of perivascular astrocyte coverage. On P5, perivascular astrocytic processes covered only 50% of the vascular surface, and this coverage increased rapidly until completion on P15. We show that the absence of MLC1 impairs this developmental process together with the astrocytic perivascular processes’ molecular maturation, with a lower Kir4.1 expression and a transient decrease in Aqp4 and Cx43 protein levels on P5. GlialCAM (whose anchorage in astrocytic membranes depends on MLC1) is distributed diffusely, as described previously. From P10 onward, perivascular astrocytic processes incompletely cover the vessels and direct contact between neuronal components and the vessel wall are observed. Interestingly, the postnatal period is also an intense synaptogenic phase in the mouse brain; astrocytes and neurons might compete for the perivascular space during this time. In the absence of MLC1, neurons might either stabilize or insert into the space left free by perivascular astrocytic processes. Remodeling of the gliovascular interface is accompanied by a loss of astrocyte polarity in Mlc1 KO. Firstly, the perivascular distribution of Cx43 gap junction at the perivascular surface is modified with more and larger puncta, and the perivascular astrocytic processes are delineated by large gap junction plaques. Interestingly, disorganization of Cx43 was recently reported in GlialCAM KO mice; this supports the hypothesis whereby the MLC1/GlialCAM complex organizes gap junction coupling in perivascular astrocytic processes. Secondly, Mlc1 KO astrocytes have an abnormally high number of ramifications, which tend to project toward the blood vessels. Thirdly, there are changes in the perivascular astrocytic processes’ polarity and organization (stacking, interpenetration, and the presence of basal lamina on the parenchymal side). Lastly, astrocytic perivascular processes are less mechanically cohesive. It was recently demonstrated that the astrocyte arborization becomes more complex between P7 and P21 – the period during which the perivascular MLC1/GlialCAM astrocytic complex forms. The formation of perivascular astrocytic process coverage (mediated by the MLC1/GliaCAM complex) might influence this process and thus polarize astrocytes. Taken as a whole, our data demonstrate that MLC1 is crucial for the development of astrocyte morphology, perivascular polarity, and perivascular coverage. What impact, then, does the lack of MLC1 have on the gliovascular physiology? Although astrocytes are key regulators of the blood–brain barrier’s integrity, the incomplete perivascular astrocyte coverage, the abnormal astrocytic polarity, and the loss of the perivascular astrocytic processes’ mechanical cohesiveness did not alter blood–brain barrier’s integrity in Mlc1 KO. Nevertheless, these changes probably alter the ‘barrier’ formed by perivascular astrocytic processes around the vessels. In turn, this might greatly affect perivascular homeostasis and astrocyte signaling toward the vascular compartment. The astrocytes’ perivascular organization is thought to be crucial for regulating the fluxes of CSF and interstitial fluid into the parenchyma. Perivascular astrocytic process alterations in Mlc1 KO mice might therefore be directly linked to the loss of DOTA-Gd intraparenchymal drainage observed. By reducing the volume of subarachnoid spaces, megalencephaly in Mlc1 KO mice may also alter the brain’s drainage capacity, as suggested by the lower level of DOTA-Gd transport into the CSF observed in Mlc1 KO mice. In the presence of an intact blood–brain barrier, impaired parenchymal circulation of the CSF/interstitial fluid might (i) contribute to the fluid accumulation and megalencephaly, (ii) lead to the progressive accumulation of harmful molecules in the brain, and (iii) thus increase susceptibility to neural disorders. Epilepsy is a significant component of MLC. Mlc1 KO mice display spontaneous epileptiform activity, an abnormally low threshold for seizure induction, and an elevated extracellular potassium concentration in the hippocampus upon prolonged high-frequency stimulation. The absence of Kir4.1 leads to hyperexcitability and epilepsy. The low level of perivascular Kir4.1 observed in Mlc1 KO mice might link MLC to epilepsy. Unlike skeletal or cardiac muscle, SMCs are not terminally differentiated and are extremely plastic. They constantly integrate signals from their local environment and undergo profound phenotypic changes in response to variations in their local environment. By perturbing perivascular homeostasis, the abnormal development of perivascular astrocytic processes in the absence of MLC1 might affect the postnatal acquisition of vascular smooth muscle cells’ contractile properties and thus result in hypoperfusion and defective neurovascular coupling. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that perivascular astrocyte coverage, MLC1 expression, and vascular smooth muscle cell contractile differentiation develop concomitantly. Interestingly, deletion of astrocytic laminin γ1 was shown to lead to the loss of vascular smooth muscle cell contractile proteins, which indicated a functional link between astrocytes and vascular smooth muscle cells. Our data now suggest that astrocytes have a critical role in the postnatal differentiation of contractile vascular smooth muscle cells. Alteration of vascular smooth muscle cell contractility might influence brain perfusion and neurovascular coupling, which are critical for oxygen and nutrient delivery to neurons this impairment might compromise neuronal and cerebral functions. Furthermore, the maintenance of axonal myelination makes extraordinary metabolic demands on oligodendrocytes. The lack of vascular smooth muscle cell contractility and the changes in blood perfusion and cerebral blood flow regulation resulting from the absence of MLC1 might contribute to progressive intramyelinic edema. This hypothesis is also supported by the fact that myelin vacuolation in Mlc1 KO mice does not start until the age of 3 months. Finally, alteration of vascular smooth muscle cell contractility could affect circulation of the CSF and perivascular fluid, although the heart beat is the main driver. Together, the development of perivascular astrocytic process, vascular smooth muscle cell maturation, CSF flux, and cerebral blood flow defects precede myelin vacuolation in Mlc1 KO mice and so are probably primary events in the pathogenesis of MLC. Our observation of swollen perivascular astrocytic processes on 1 year but not on P60 Mlc1 KO mice indicates that edema develops progressively in the absence of MLC1 and suggests that the pathogenic process is irresistible. In contrast to the mouse, expression of MLC1 and the astrocyte’s perivascular coverage are initiated prenatally in humans, as already suggested by earlier observations of perivascular GFAP and AQP4 expression. These results suggest that in humans impaired perivascular astrocytic process formation linked to the absence of MLC1 might occur prenatally, deregulating perivascular homeostasis and then the perinatal differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cell contractility, leading to a progressive white matter vacuolation. In conclusion, we showed that the astrocyte-specific protein MLC1, the absence of which causes MLC, is critical for the postnatal development of perivascular astrocyte coverage, the acquisition of vascular smooth muscle cell contractility, and parenchymal CFS/ISF (cerebrospinal fluid/interstitial fluid) efflux. Our results shed light on the role of astrocytes in the postnatal acquisition of vascular smooth muscle cell contractility, a crucial component of neurovascular coupling in the brain. Our data indicate that MLC could be considered primarily as an early developmental disorder of the gliovascular unit. Moreover, our study illustrates how looking at physiopathological processes in a rare disease can enlighten important aspects of the brain’s physiology.