3. Materials and Methods 3.1. Materials The studied peptides Ac-AKGHEHQLE-NH2 (L1) and Ac-FGEHEHGRD-NH2 (L2) were purchased from KareBay Biochem, Inc. (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). The pBR322 plasmid DNA from E. coli RRI buffered solution was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA), while other chemical reagents (e.g., CuCl2, NaOH, HCl, H2O2, Asc) were acquired from commercial sources, mainly from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). 3.2. Mass Spectrometry  ESI-MS experiments were performed on the LCMS-9030 qTOF Shimadzu (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) device, equipped with a standard ESI source and the Nexera X2 system. Analysis was performed in the positive ion mode between 100 and 3000 m/z. The LCMS-9030 parameters were: nebulizing gas—nitrogen, nebulizing gas flow—3.0 L/min, drying gas flow—10 L/min, heating gas flow—10 L/min, interface temperature 300 °C, desolvation line temperature—400 °C, detector voltage—2.02 kV, interface voltage 4.0 kV, collision gas-argon, mobile phase 50% A in B (where A is water + 0.1% acetic acid and B is acetonitrile + 0.1% acetic acid), mobile phase total flow—0.3 mL/min. The injection volume was within the range of 0.1 to 1 μL, depending on the intensity of the signals observed on the mass spectrum. All obtained signals had mass accuracy errors in the range of 1 ppm. The concentration of peptide was 1 10−4 M with a M/L molar ratio of 1:1. Samples were prepared in the water/acetonitrile (50/50 v/v) mixture at pH 7. All of the used solvents were of LC-MS grade. The obtained data were analyzed and simulated using an ACD/Spectrus processor (ACD/Labs, Toronto, ON, Canada). 3.3. Potentiometric Measurements Overall stability constants for proton and metal complexes were calculated from titration curves registered over the pH range of 2.5–10.5 at 25 °C, in 5 mM HCl water solution and ionic strength of 0.1 M (NaCl), using a total volume of 1.5 mL. Potentiometric titrations were performed using a Metrohm 905 Titrando (Metrohm AG, Herisau, Switzerland) pH meter system provided with a Mettler-Toledo InLabMicro (Mettler-Tololedo, Columbus, OH, USA) combination pH electrode. High-purity grade argon was gently blown over the studied solution (to maintain an inert atmosphere). Solutions were titrated with 0.1003 M carbonate-free NaOH. The electrode was calibrated daily for hydrogen ion concentration by titrating HCl with an alkaline solution. The ligand concentration was 1.1 mM and the metal-to-ligand ratios were 1:1.1 and 1:3. The standard potential and the slope of the electrode were computed with Glee software. The purities and exact concentrations of the ligand solutions were determined in SUPERQUAD using the Gran method. The HYPERQUAD 2006 program was employed for the overall (β) stability constant calculations. The reported pKa values represent the acid dissociation constants of the corresponding species. The computed standard deviations (referring to random errors only) were given by the program itself and are shown in parentheses as uncertainties in the last significant figure. 3.4. Spectroscopic Studies Electronic absorption (UV-Vis) spectra were recorded using a Cary 60 spectrophotometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and circular dichroism (CD) spectra measurements were performed on a Jasco J-1500 spectropolarimeter (JASCO Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), both at 25 °C. The direct CD measurements (θ (mdeg)) were converted to the mean residue molar ellipticity (Δε (M−1 cm−1)) using a Jasco Spectra Manager (JASCO Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). In both spectroscopic techniques, the spectra were measured in two quartz cuvettes with optical path lengths (OPL) of 1.0 and 0.1 cm in the 300–800 and 200–400 nm ranges for each cuvette, respectively. The ligand concentration was 1.1 × 10−3 M and a metal-to-ligand molar ratio of 1:1.1 was used. The EPR spectra were recorded on a Bruker spectrophotometer (Bruker ELEXSYS E500 CW-EPR, Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) in the X-band frequency (9.5 GHz). The molar ratios were the same as those used for UV-Vis and CD measurements. However, The concentrations of samples were (Cu(II)) = 3 × 10−3 M. Ethylene glycol was added to each sample to obtain homogeneity (3:10, v:v). The samples were frozen and the measurements were carried out at −19 °C (liquid nitrogen). All EPR parameters were calculated through spectral simulation in the Doubletexact system (SPIN = 1/2: EXACT) as implemented by Andrew Ozarowski, National High Field Magnetic Laboratory, University of Florida, for the spectra obtained at the maximum concentration of the particular species. Measurements were carried out in the pH 3.0–11.0 range using Mettler-Toledo SevenEasy pH meter (Mettler-Tololedo, Columbus, OH, USA) equipped with a combined glass-Ag/AgCl electrode (InLab Micro, Mettler-Toled, Columbus, OH, USA). The strong acid and base solutions were used in order to change the pH values. All measured spectra were used to determine the coordination processes of cupric ions to the peptides with increasing pH values. 3.5. Theoretical Studies Computational theoretical chemistry methods were used as useful tools to predict the structure and stability of the ligands and complexes. Molecular orbital studies on 1:1 Cu(II) cation complexes with L1 and L2 ligands were performed at the DFT level, with the IEFPCM solvent (water) model introduced for potential energy surface investigations. The starting structure of the peptide for DFT calculations was generated on the basis of the amino acid sequence after 75 ps simulation at 300 K, without cutoffs using BIO+ implementation of the CHARMM force field. DFT calculations were performed with the Gaussian 09 C.01 suite of programs using the ωB97X-D long-range-corrected hybrid density functional with damped atom-atom dispersion corrections and a double-ζ 6–31G(d,p) basis set containing polarization functions. All presented structures were and thermodynamically stable. 3.6. DNA Cleavage and Reactive Oxygen Species Detection The ability of Cu(II) complexes of studied peptides to induce single- and double-strand breaks in the absence and presence of H2O2 or ascorbic acid was tested with the pBR322 plasmid DNA from E. coli RRI (Merck). The molar ratios of M/L 1:1 reagents were at the final concentrations described under each electropherogram. The samples were dissolved in 50 mM phosphate buffer at pH 6.8 containing DNA (25 μg/mL). After 1 h incubation at 37 °C, reaction mixtures (20 μL) were mixed with 4 μL of loading buffer (bromophenol blue in 30% glycerol) and loaded on 1% agarose gels containing ethidium bromide in TBE buffer (90 mM Tris/borate, pH 8.0; 20 mM EDTA). Gel electrophoresis was performed at a constant voltage of 4 V cm−1 for 180 min. The gels were photographed and processed with a Digital Imaging System (Syngen Biotech, Wroclaw, Poland). Results were obtained in triplicate for all experiments. Moreover, when the same concentration of the reagents was used in several experiments, the view of the lanes was compared with the obtained electropherograms. 3.7. ROS Generation Measurements NDMA, a scavenger molecule used commonly in studies on hydroxyl radicals and reactive species, was used in the spectroscopic absorption experiments. The measurements were followed at 37 °C on a Cary 60 spectrophotometer equipped with a Single-Cell Peltier Accessory (Agilent Technologies) in 1 cm cuvettes at 440 nm, which is a characteristic wavelength of NDMA absorption. The reaction mixtures contained NDMA (25 μM), peptide, Cu(II) (each 50 μM) and H2O2 or Asc (0.5 mM), all in sodium phosphate buffer (50 mM). Data are reported as the averages of three trials with standard deviations shown in the figures.