4. Conclusions Cancer is now one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide, with an estimated 18 million new cases and almost 10 million deaths in 2018. Globally, about 1 in 6 deaths is due to cancer. It is predicted that by 2030, the number of new cancer cases will increase to more than 21 million and cancer-related deaths will increase to 13 million per year. In many cases, human microbiota are associated with cancer progression, e.g., F. nucleatum promotes colon cancer growth and even metastasis. Microbial pathogens drive tumorigenesis in 15–20% of cancer cases. On the other hand, reactive species are indeed a relevant class of carcinogens as powerful oxidizing agents capable of damaging DNA and other important biomolecules. Therefore, physiological ROS generation may account for the enlarged risk of cancer development in the aged, while the increased formation of ROS promotes the development of malignancy. It was concluded that outer membrane proteins from F. nucleatum stimulated colon cancer cells to produce reactive oxygen species. They also displayed the ability to induce oxidative stress inside these cells. Moreover, we proved that F. nucleatum strains in the presence of cupric ions and H2O2 generate free radicals outside the bacterial cells. The present study shows that ROS production is very efficient when copper(II) ions are bound to outer membrane proteins. As a transition metal ion, copper(II) can promote a Fenton-like reaction that leads to high amounts of reactive oxygen species. If ROS are not quenched by antioxidants, they can damage cells at different sites and in different ways. In the case of DNA, unrepaired damage can lead to the initiation and progression of the carcinogenesis process. It should be stressed that dietary copper is absorbed partially in the stomach. However, the largest portion passes into the duodenum and ileum, which are the major sites of absorption. As copper reaches the duodenum, it comes in contact with copper transporter 1, which is the primary protein responsible for the import of dietary copper across the brush border microvilli. Due to the long retention time of high copper foods (e.g., organ meats, red meat) in the colon (12–30 h) and the presence of endogenous hydrogen peroxide, which is produced by heme oxygenase, the Fenton reaction could be very effective. In consequence, a lot of free radicals are formed under these conditions. Therefore, metal ion chelation may lead to oxidation stress and DNA relaxation or degradation. Moreover, it was shown herein that the porin P1 precursor fragment may be considered a DNA-cleaving agent. These findings suggest that bacteria are actively involved in colon cancer progression via a radical-mediated mechanism. Studied peptides L1 and L2 derived from the outer membrane protein P1 precursor from F. nucleatum subsp. nucleatum bind Cu(II) ions tightly and form thermodynamically stable {4N,1O} complexes. Both experimental and theoretical results show that various coordination modes and structures can be observed in the solution. Several functional groups within the molecule are involved in metal binding. However, nitrogen donors play the leading role in metal binding. They form short and strong interactions with copper(II) ions. Imidazole rings are responsible for the greatest number of metal-ligand interactions. However, all typical histidine-cation and amide nitrogen-cation interactions are assisted by interactions between oxygen and metal ions. Metal-nitrogen interactions lie in the 1.8–2.2 Å range, while supporting interactions with oxygen have a wider range of 1.8–2.6 Å. Cu(II)-L1 and Cu(II)-L2 complexes also have a rich network of hydrogen bonds that stabilizes the complexes. Both ligands form short regular fragments of the backbones—alpha-helical for L1 and alpha-helical and 3-10 helical for Ac-FGEHEHGRD-NH2. Nevertheless, the HB network of the L2 complexes is significantly richer due to the presence of Arg residue, which is responsible for 50% of HBs or more. Both complexes produce reactive oxygen species when accompanied by hydrogen peroxide or ascorbic acid. However, in the case of addition H2O2, the amount of ROS formed is significantly higher than observed for uncomplexed copper(II) ions. It should be stressed that in Fenton-like reactions, Cu(III) ions may be formed. This oxidation state is stabilized by the peptide backbone, involving deprotonated peptide bonds, hydrogen bonds and the surrounding of the metal ion. This leads to efficient hydroxyl radical generation. The situation is different in the case of the addition of negatively charged ascorbate. This molecule seems to be repelled by the carboxylate groups in the coordination sphere of metal ions. Therefore, ROS production is less pronounced for the complexes than free copper(II) ions. Both complexes exhibit DNA cleavage abilities. Surprisingly, 500 µM L2 causes overall DNA degradation, although this is not specific. Most probably, the histidine residues interact with DNA and the acid-base cleavage of the phosphate backbone occurs. Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.