Material and Methods Malaria Patients and Healthy Donors Plasma samples from P. vivax-infected patients (PV) were collected at Tierralta, Colombia. The local ethical committee of Universidad de Córdoba reviewed and approved these studies (Acta #007 mayo 22 de 2017). Plasma from healthy donors (HD) was obtained at the Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol (Badalona, Barcelona, Spain) after expressed consent from the donors. Plasma from first-infected P. vivax patients from Barcelona was collected at the Hospital Clinic under the approval of the Hospital´s committee (identification number 4228). Blood Collection and Plasma Processing Three mL of peripheral blood were collected by venipuncture in citrate pre-treated tubes. Samples were centrifuged at 400 x g for 10 min at room temperature (RT). Plasma was collected and centrifuged twice at 2000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Supernatant was recovered, aliquoted and frozen at -80°C. Frozen plasmas from Tierralta were shipped on dry-ice to Institut Germans Trias i Pujol (IGTP, Badalona, Spain). Plasma collected from HDs and primo-infected P. vivax patients was similarly processed. EVs Purification by Direct Immuno-Affinity Capture (DIC) One ml of plasma was thawed on ice and immediately diluted 1:10 in cold PBS and subjected to ultracentrifugation at 120,000 x g for four hours in a TH-641 Swinging Bucket Rotor (Sorvall™ WX+, ThermoFisher Ultracentrifuge) to pellet total EVs. The resulting pelleted samples (P120) were resuspended in 300 μl cold PBS and protein quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, ThermoFisher Scientific). All the following steps were also performed at 4°C. Magnetic beads from Dynabeads™ Antibody Coupling Kit (ThermoFisher 14311D) were conjugated to recombinant rabbit monoclonal anti-CD71 antibody (Abcam: ab214039) following manufacturer’s instructions. P120 fractions were incubated with anti-CD71 coupled-dynabeads at 4°C with nutation and rotation for 16 hours. Nutation was obtained by placing the tubes in a container containing a circular sponge placed inside in diagonal position. After incubation, flow-through was recovered and then EVs-dynabeads complexes washed twice with ice-cold PBS. Immediately after the last wash, captured EVs (DIC fraction) were resuspended in cell lysis buffer (20Mm Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1mM Na2EDTA, 1mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100), sonicated 1X for 10 seconds and incubated 30 minutes on ice. Finally, protein concentration was determined using a BCA Protein Assay Kit. Western Blot (WB) Samples (P120 fractions, flow-through and EV-lysates) were mixed with NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (4X) (Invitrogen, NP0007) with 1mM DTT (10X) to denature proteins in reducing conditions. Samples were heated at 95°C for 5 min, beads removed from the sample using a magnet and the lysate was used for immunoblot analysis. For that, equivalent protein amount of P120 fraction (Input), flowthrough and DIC fractions were separated on a 8% SDS-PAGE, transferred on to Hybond-C nitrocellulose membrane (Amersham) and blocked in blocking buffer (1 X PBS, 0.1% Tween-20, 5% milk powder) overnight. After three washes, blots were incubated for 1 h with recombinant rabbit monoclonal anti-CD71 (1:1500, ab214039) in antibody buffer (1X PBS, 0.1% Tween-20, 1% milk powder). Subsequently, blots were washed and incubated for 1 h with the Li-Cor IRDye-labeled secondary antibodies IRDye 680RD goat anti-rabbit (1:20.000, 925-68021). Blots were scanned and analyzed with the Odyssey quantitative western blot near-infrared system (Li-Cor Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA) having the intensity of 700 channel set up at 5. Images were edited using the software Image J (NIH). Reticulocyte Culture and huRex Isolation Human cord blood samples were obtained from the Barcelona Blood and Tissue Bank (), following approval for the protocol and informed consent by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of Vall d’Hebron University Hospital [PR(CS)236/2017]. Human reticulocyte preparations were performed as previously described, with some modifications. Briefly, samples were centrifuged at 1000 x g for 15 min (acceleration = 6, deceleration = 2) and plasma was removed. Cell pellets were washed with incomplete Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 Medium at 500 x g for 10 min and resuspended at 50% hematocrit with incomplete RPMI. Five milliliters of resuspended blood were carefully loaded on 6 ml of 70% Percoll (GE Healthcare) and centrifuged at 1200 x g for 15 min at 20°C (acceleration = 4, deceleration = 0). Reticulocytes concentrated in the Percoll interface were collected and washed three times with incomplete RMPI (centrifugations at 400 x g for 5 min). To deplete leukocytes, reticulocyte-enriched pellets were resuspended to a final volume of 900 µl with incomplete RPMI and incubated with 100 µl of CD45 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-045-801) for 18 min at 4°C, mixing every 3 min. The cells were washed with incomplete culture media and passed through LS Columns (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-042-401) placed on a magnetic stand. Eluents, containing reticulocyte-enriched fractions were washed twice with incomplete culture media, and reticulocyte enrichment quantified by BCB/Giemsa staining and viability checked by trypan blue staining. The fraction containing enriched reticulocyte was re-suspended in exosome-depleted medium (RPMI supplemented with 0.5% human AB serum), transferred to a culture flask at 3% hematocrit and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 36h. After 36-hour incubation, the culture was collected and centrifuged at 1300 x g for 20 min at RT (acceleration = 9, deceleration = 9). Human reticulocyte-derived exosomes (huRex) used as positive control of CD71+ EVs in western blot analysis were obtained as described. Reticulocyte culture supernatants were used as starting material in positive control CD71+ EVs immune-capture experiments. Mass Spectrometry Analysis Samples Preparation and Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Samples were processed for peptide digestion using the commercial kit (PreOmics) according to the manufacturer’s protocol adapted for samples containing <20 μg of protein with slight modifications. Briefly, CD71+ EVs dynabeads complexes were resuspended in 20 μl of PreOmics lysis buffer and heated at 70°C for 10 minutes. After this step, samples were placed in a magnet and EV lysates recovered and loaded into the cartridge and treated with 20 μl of Digest buffer at 37°C, 500 r.p.m for 3h. Digested samples were washed and eluted according the standard protocol. After elution, samples were immediately speed-vac dried at 45°C and kept at -80°C. One μg of each sample was analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 90 min gradient at the Proteomic Unit of the Genomic Research Center (Barcelona, Spain). As a quality control, BSA controls were digested in parallel and ran between each sample to avoid carryover and assess the instrument performance. Protein Identification Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a customized database including P. vivax (all strains: 52920 entries) and Swiss-Prot human (20581 entries) (February 2020) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. Peptides have been filtered based on a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for peptides, one unique peptide per protein and a minimum peptide length of 8. Mass spectrometry proteomic data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via PRIDE with the dataset identifier PXD029439. Data Analysis Protein groups identified in plasma-derived CD71+ EVs isolated by DIC were classified according to species H. sapiens and P. vivax. H. sapiens proteins were screened for common contaminants (keratins), immunoglobulins, complement proteins as well as potential serum contaminants which were excluded from the analysis. H. sapiens protein groups identified with one unique peptide or more with a false discovery rate < 1% at peptide level and assigned with the category of Master protein by Proteome Discoverer™ software, were retained. The data have been transformed to a logarithmic scale (Log2) and have been normalized (Global median normalization). A statistical analysis at the protein group level was performed comparing the group of P. vivax patients versus non-infected patients. For each protein, we report the fold change, p-value and adjusted p-value (q-value). When a protein was detected in 5-6 patients in one group and it was not detected in the other group, we artificially assign it a p-value = 0 and a FoldChange = Infinite (they have been considered “presence versus absence”). Enrichment analysis of human proteins with statistical differential abundance in P. vivax infected patients was done with the Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (David 6.8). Results from the Gene ontology and KEGG databases are shown. P. vivax protein groups identified with one unique peptide or more, FDR < 1%, category of Master Protein by Proteome Discoverer software, were retained. Parasite protein groups identified in the group of healthy donors were excluded as false positives. Uniprot accession numbers of P. vivax protein groups were used to retrieve protein sequences and used to identify respective ID in Sal I and PVP01 genome through Blast analysis in PlasmoDB. Redundant entries were filtered out from the final list of proteins. Unresolved protein groups (> 2 accession numbers assigned) which were excluded by the algorithm (due to the redundancy of the customized database) were manually recovered. For P. vivax proteins subcellular localizations were retrieved from Uniprot. For proteins without subcellular localization data, predictions were performed based on orthology to P. falciparum or homologues in human proteins. Measurement of IgG Responses by Multiplex Bead-Based Assays (Luminex) Measurement of plasma IgG antibodies was performed by multiplex bead-based assay using the Luminex technology, as described. The different recombinant proteins and peptides included in this study were covalently coupled to four MagPlex magnetic carboxylated microspheres (Luminex Corporation, TX, USA). Next, in 1.25 million coated beads we coupled 1 μg of each antigen following manufacturer’s instructions. Using a Neubauer chamber coated-beads were quantified and mixed in equal amounts. Only one batch of microspheres was prepared for the study. Plasma (1:100 dilution) was incubated with around 2000 beads per analyte in duplicates, followed by anti-human IgG-biotin (1:4000 dilution) (Sigma-Aldrich) incubation. Next, streptavidin-conjugated to R-phycoerthrin (R-PE) (1 μg/mL) was incubated for 10 min at RT and beads were acquired on the BioPlex100 system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and express the results as median fluorescence intensity (MFI) of duplicates. Cross-reactivity was ruled out analyzing a subset of plasmas in singleplex and multiplex. A panel of eight negative controls from healthy individuals from Barcelona was included on every plate. Cutoffs for antibody positivity were determined for each plate by calculating mean +2 standard deviation of the negative control values. Statistical Analysis All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism software (Version 8.3.0) and are presented as mean ± standard deviation.  Figure 2A  was a single analysis of PvEVs (n=6) vs huEVs (n=6) in which a Mann-Whitney non-parametric test was used to calculate the p-value represented in this experiment. Differences were considered significant when the p-value was < 0.05. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01.