Discussion The development of a vaccine against Plasmodium vivax, the most widely distributed human malaria parasite, remains a formidable challenge as only two vaccine candidates are presently in clinical trials. Moreover, other vaccine candidates progressing to human clinical trials are based on a limited number of parasite antigens. Although new approaches and delivery platform are being pursued, there is a clear need for discovering new antigens for vaccination. The biological properties of EVs endorse them with a remarkable potential as new antigen discovery machines and novel vaccines against infectious diseases. Thus, original data obtained from exosomes derived from dendritic cells (DCs) infected with Mycobacterium avium, an opportunistic parasite in AIDS patients, contained pathogen glycopeptidolipids and stimulated a pro-inflammatory response in resting non-infected macrophages. Similar observations were also made with exosomes derived from macrophages infected with other intracellular pathogens, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, M. bovis BCG, Salmonella typhimurium and Toxoplasma gondii. More recently, proteomic studies have confirmed the presence of pathogen proteins associated with EVs in different infectious diseases. Of interest, plasma-derived exosomes obtained from pigs that had overcome an infection caused by the Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV), a single-strand RNA virus, that induces respiratory failure similarly to Sars-Cov-2, demonstrated the presence of viral peptides associated to EVs which upon immunization in targeted-pig trials, elicited specific γ-IFN responses. In the case of malaria, original studies using a rodent malaria model that, similar to P. vivax has a tropism for reticulocytes, showed that reticulocyte-derived exosomes from infections conferred long lasting protection against a lethal challenge. Protection was spleen-dependent and elicited non-exhausted memory T cells with effector phenotype. Altogether, the data above clearly show that extracellular vesicles obtained from different infectious diseases, including malaria, can discover antigens for vaccination and can be used as an antigen delivery platform. Our overall proteomic analysis of CD71+ EVs obtained directly from human P. vivax patients showed the presence of 440 human proteins groups including 48 EVs markers and 48 parasite proteins ( Supplementary Table 1 ). Among the EV markers, CD71 (TFRC), was detected in all of the samples with 30 unique peptides (27 mapping to extracellular domains of CD71 and 3 mapping to the cytoplasmic tail). These data strongly indicate that immune-captured CD71 corresponds to membrane bound monomeric and/or dimeric forms. Due to the abundance of soluble CD71 in plasma and that preparative ultracentrifugation does not eliminate completely abundant plasma protein from the starting material, we cannot exclude that non-EV associated CD71 soluble form will also be pull down in the immune-captures. Yet, other EV markers include canonical EVs associated proteins such CD9, Flotillin-2, HSPA8, HSP90AA1B as well as 13 out of 22 core proteome exosomal markers recently described. Together, these results strongly suggest that immune-captured CD71+ EVs from human plasma are mostly comprised of exosomal vesicles. The methodology employed here allowed the detection of 48 P. vivax proteins in CD71+ EVs, 28 of them robustly detected with two or more unique peptides ( Figure 3A ). These proteome data contrast with our previous report of EVs isolated by SEC, indicating a superior performance of this method for the identification and quantification of parasite proteins in plasma-derived EVs. The vast majority of detected P. vivax proteins ( Figure 3C ) correspond to proteins associated to membranes, some well stabilized surface anchored proteins like several members of the merozoite surface family (MSP1, MSP3, MSP7, MSP9), an integral membrane VIR protein (PVP01_1272500), four members of the PHIST family, and five members of the Plasmodium exported protein family, both families observed in five patients and one of which (PVX_094300) detected in five patients, and some (PVX_081830, PVX_110835 and PVX_083560) having orthologues of conserved P. falciparum proteins of unknown function. Proteins from other vesicular compartments like lysosomes included several members of the serine repeat antigens, as well as proteins located in the Golgi apparatus (Ras-related protein Rab-2 putative) and a PvFam-a protein (Tryptophan rich antigen) which orthologue in P. falciparum has been located in Maurer’s cleft (MC). Overall, the presence of abundant membrane associated parasite proteins is in agreement with its potential interaction with host-derived exosomes. The biogenesis of EVs in P. vivax is presently unknown. Yet, this species has a tropism for reticulocytes, young red cells which selectively removes plasma proteins [noticeably the transferrin receptor (CD71)] in their maturation to erythrocytes. Elegant transmission electron microscope (TEM) studies showed that upon entrance of the parasite, and similar to P. falciparum, there is a striking remodeling of the cytoplasm containing the parasite and its membrane inside a parasitophorous vacuole (PV) also surrounded by a PV membrane (PVM), clefts and electrodense vesicular bodies. Strikingly, unlike P. falciparum which forms protrusions at the plasma membrane where variant surface virulent determinants are located, P. vivax induced the formation of Caveola-Vesicle-Complex (CVC) where parasite proteins are located. Further TEM evidence of this remodeling and structures has been obtained by us as part of another study ( Figure 4 ). It is therefore legitimate to speculate that upon entrance to the reticulocyte, P. vivax remodels the cytoplasm, including the formation of clefts facilitating the export of variant proteins such as PHISTc and Plasmodium exported proteins to the reticulocyte plasma membrane. Endocytosis of this membrane containing parasite proteins, the transferrin receptor (CD71), and other selected cargo (i.e. HLA-I), creates a single membrane cytoplasmic endosome. Upon re-invagination of this membrane and incorporation of soluble proteins found in the cytoplasm, electrodense double membrane vesicles are formed which upon fusion to CVC release CD71+ EVs. Noticeably, several of the identified parasite proteins are immunogenic; thus, the merozoite surface protein 1 (PVX_099980), the heat shock 70 kDa protein, putative (PVX_089425), the serine-repeat antigen 1 (SERA) (PVX_003835), the merozoite surface protein-9 precursor (PVX_124060), the merozoite surface protein 7 (MSP7), the putative (PVX_082680) and the PHIST protein (Pf-fam-b) (PVX_088830). These data strongly indicate that parasite proteins associated with CD71+ EVs are antigenic. In this context, we found in CD71+ EVs sixteen protein groups associated to the antigen processing and presentation of exogenous peptide antigen via MHC class I, TAP-dependent including all three isoforms of the major histocompatibility complex class I (HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C), β-2 microglobulin, CD36, integrin subunit beta 5 (ITGB5) and 9, proteosome subunit alpha (1-7) and proteosome subunit B (1-2). These data indicate that plasma-derived exosomes from P. vivax patients contain novel antigens for vaccination and that they can be further explored as a novel antigen delivery platform.