CD71 direct immuno-affinity capture (DIC). (A) Chart showing an overview of the direct immune-capture (DIC) procedure. 1. Generation of total EVs (P120 fraction) by ultracentrifugation. 2. Coupling of monoclonal anti-CD71 antibody to commercial dynabeads. 3. Direct immune-capture of CD71+ EVs from total plasma EVs indicating downstream analysis by western blot and LC-MS/MS. (B) Representation of oligomeric (membrane bound) and cleaved (soluble) CD71 forms with their respective molecular weights indicating the region of the epitope to which monoclonal anti-CD71 antibody binds. (C) Western blot analysis of exosomes immune-captured from culture supernatant of human reticulocytes isolated from cord blood using anti-CD71 dynabeads. Left panel shows absence of CD71 forms in the DIC fraction of the specificity control condition (rabbit IgG isotype-dynabeads). Right panel shows CD71 forms enriched in the DIC fraction of anti-CD71 dynabeads as compared to equivalent protein amount loaded from the input (µg). (D) Western blot analysis of CD71+ EVs immune-captured from total EVs (P120) of two P. vivax patients using anti-CD71-dynabeads showing enrichment of all forms of CD71 in patient 5 and only 73 kDa in patient 12. Dashed lines in the blots indicate a non-adjacent well from the same membrane incubated with anti-CD71 antibody. Protein amount loaded on the gels is shown at the bottom. MWM, molecular weight marker in kDa. Human proteome of CD71+ EVs isolated by direct immuno-affinity capture (DIC) from P. vivax patients and healthy donors (HDs). (A) EV markers distribution and abundance in patients and healthy donor groups. Cytoskeleton proteins (ACTN1, ACTN4, ACTB, MSN and RHOA), members of the Annexin family (ANXA1, ANXA2, ANXA6), cell signaling regulators (YWHAB, YWHAE, YWHAG, YWHAQ and YWHAZ), integrins (ITGB1 and LGALS3BP), molecular chaperones (HSP90AA1 and HSPA8), glycolytic enzymes (GAPDH, ALDOA, and ENO1), GTP-binding proteins (RAP1B), GTPases (RAB10, RAB7A, RAB27A), Guanine nucleotide-binding proteins (GNB1 and GNAI2), regulators of lipid synthesis (CD5L), antigen presenting proteins (HLA-A), transmembrane trafficking proteins (SDCBP), iron uptake (TFRC) and members of the tetraspanin family (CD9) among others. (B) Mean of the total number of human protein groups quantified in P. vivax patients (n=6) and healthy donors (n=6). Mann-Whitney test,** p <0.05. (C) Quantitative comparison of protein groups abundance of CD71+ EVs from P. vivax patients and healthy donors. Volcano plot representation showing proteins up and downregulated (statistical significance q-val <0.05). Proteins listed in the inset were uniquely identified in P. vivax patients. (D, E) Enrichment analysis of proteins upregulated in CD71+ EVs from P. vivax patients by Gene ontology (GO) (D) and KEGG (E) pathway analysis. GO enrichment analysis shows terms of Cellular component (red), Biological process (blue) and Molecular function (green). 
Supplementary Excel Files 1, 2
 contain extended supporting data of these analysis. 
P. vivax protein groups identified in proteomic analysis of CD71+ EVs isolated by direct immuno-affinity capture (DIC) from plasma of P. vivax patients. (A) Non-redundant P. vivax protein groups quantified in CD71+ EVs indicating Sal-I and PVP01 PlasmoDB accessions and descriptions, number of samples where they were identified, number of unique peptides and PSMs. Extended supporting data of these analysis can be found in 
Supplementary Excel File 1
. (B) Parasite protein groups distribution in P. vivax patients. (C) Pie chart showing predicted subcellular localization of parasite protein groups identified in CD71+ EVs. Subcellular compartment assignations were retrieved from Uniprot. In those cases where localization was unknown, predictions were performed by inference in orthologues of P. falciparum or homologues in human. Model of EV biogenesis in P. vivax-Infected reticulocytes. Left, transmission electron micrograph (TEM) image of a P. vivax-infected reticulocyte. P, parasite; N, nucleus; Hz, hemozooin crystal; PV, parasitophorous vacuole; PVM, parasitophorous vacuole membrane; VB, Vesicular body; C, Clefts; CVC, Caveola-Vesicle-Complex. Right. Model of EV biogenesis. Upon entrance to the reticulocyte, P. vivax remodels the cytoplasm, including the formation of clefts facilitating the export of variant proteins such as PHISTc and Plasmodium exported proteins to the reticulocyte membrane. Endocytosis of this membrane containing parasite proteins, the transferrin receptor (CD71), and other selected cargo (i.e. HLA-I), creates a single membrane cytoplasmic endosome. Upon re-invagination of this membrane and incorporation of soluble proteins found in the cytoplasm, electrodense double membrane vesicles are formed which upon fusion to CVC release CD71+ EVs. TEM image and model was made in biorender contributed by Carmen Fernandez-Becerra.