REFERENCES Composite analysis of immunological and metabolic markers defines novel subtypes of triple negative breast cancer. Mechanisms of sensitivity and resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition. CDK4/6 inhibitor biomarker Research: are we barking up the wrong tree? The history and future of targeting cyclin-dependent kinases in cancer therapy. Mice thrive without Cdk4 and Cdk2. Oncogene-induced senescence is part of the tumorigenesis barrier imposed by DNA damage checkpoints. Genomic characterization of metastatic breast cancers. Cellular mechanisms of tumour suppression by the retinoblastoma gene. Distinct roles for cyclins E and A during DNA replication complex assembly and activation. Therapeutic CDK4/6 inhibition in breast cancer: key mechanisms of response and failure. Cellular targets for activation by the E2F1 transcription factor include DNA synthesis- and G1/S-regulatory genes. Patient-derived models of human breast cancer: protocols for in vitro and in vivo applications in tumor biology and translational medicine. Tumor grafts derived from women with breast cancer authentically reflect tumor pathology, growth, metastasis and disease outcomes. Cycling to cancer with cyclin D1. Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) is essential for cell division and suppression of DNA re-replication but not for liver regeneration. PD 0332991, a selective cyclin D kinase 4/6 inhibitor, preferentially inhibits proliferation of luminal estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cell lines in vitro. High-throughput screening using patient-derived tumor xenografts to predict clinical trial drug response. CDK4/6 inhibition in cancer: beyond cell cycle arrest. Aurora-A kinase inhibition is synthetic lethal with loss of the RB1 tumor suppressor gene. Repression of human papillomavirus oncogenes in HeLa cervical carcinoma cells causes the orderly reactivation of dormant tumor suppressor pathways. A map of protein dynamics during cell-cycle progression and cell-cycle exit. Loss of Cdk2 and cyclin A2 impairs cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in multidimensional genomic data. Cell cycle control and cancer. Early adaptation and acquired resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer. Regulation of retinoblastoma protein functions by ectopic expression of human cyclins. Role of E2F in cell cycle control and cancer. Increased replication initiation and conflicts with transcription underlie Cyclin E-induced replication stress. Cyclin A is redundant in fibroblasts but essential in hematopoietic and embryonic stem cells. Cell cycle and beyond: exploiting new RB1 controlled mechanisms for cancer therapy. Defining the transcriptional and biological response to CDK4/6 inhibition in relation to ER+/HER2-breast cancer. The strange case of CDK4/6 inhibitors: mechanisms, resistance, and combination strategies. Cyclin A is a functional target of retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein-mediated cell cycle arrest. Expression of p16 and retinoblastoma determines response to CDK4/6 inhibition in ovarian cancer. Mouse development and cell proliferation in the absence of D-cyclins. Functional determinants of cell-cycle plasticity and sensitivity to CDK4/6 inhibition. Cyclin D3 compensates for loss of cyclin D2 in mouse B-lymphocytes activated via the antigen receptor and CD40. S-Phase entry upon ectopic expression of G1 cyclin-dependent kinases in the absence of retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation. Loss of the FAT1 tumor suppressor promotes resistance to CDK4/6 inhibitors via the hippo pathway. Viral oncoprotein binding to pRB, p107, p130, and p300. To cycle or not to cycle: a critical decision in cancer. Is Cyclin D1-CDK4 kinase a bona fide cancer target? Mammalian cells cycle without the D-type cyclin-dependent kinases Cdk4 and Cdk6. Improved estimation of cancer dependencies from large-scale RNAi screens using model-based normalization and data integration. Cyclin D activates the Rb tumor suppressor by mono-phosphorylation. The Rb/E2F pathway and cancer. Finding CDK: linking yeast with humans. Preclinical activity of abemaciclib alone or in combination with antimitotic and targeted therapies in breast cancer. The genetic landscape and clonal evolution of breast cancer resistance to palbociclib plus fulvestrant in the PALOMA-3 trial. Early circulating tumor DNA dynamics and clonal selection with palbociclib and fulvestrant for breast cancer. Cells lacking the RB1 tumor suppressor gene are hyperdependent on aurora B kinase for survival. The BioGRID database: a comprehensive biomedical resource of curated protein, genetic, and chemical interactions. Binary pan-cancer classes with distinct vulnerabilities defined by pro- or anti-cancer YAP/TEAD activity. The role of Cdk5 in neuroendocrine thyroid cancer. Integrating old and new paradigms of G1/S control. The DREAM complex: master coordinator of cell cycle-dependent gene expression. A code of mono-phosphorylation modulates the function of RB. Cdk1 is sufficient to drive the mammalian cell cycle. CDK6 as a key regulator of hematopoietic and leukemic stem cell activation. Cyclin-dependent kinase pathways as targets for cancer treatment. D-type cyclins. Cancer cell cycles. Cell cycle control and cancer. Requirement for cyclin D3 in lymphocyte development and T cell leukemias. Targeting cell-cycle machinery in cancer. Proliferation of cancer cells despite CDK2 inhibition. Defining a cancer dependency map. Cyclin E1 expression and palbociclib efficacy in previously treated hormone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer. Molecular pathways: targeting the cyclin D-CDK4/6 Axis for cancer treatment. The genomic landscape of intrinsic and acquired resistance to cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitors in patients with hormone receptor positive metastatic breast cancer. The retinoblastoma protein and cell cycle control. Targeting the vulnerability of RB tumor suppressor loss in triple-negative breast cancer. The meaning of p16(ink4a) expression in tumors: functional significance, clinical associations and future developments. Subunit rearrangement of the cyclin-dependent kinases is associated with cellular transformation. Highlights There is significant heterogeneity in the requirement for G1/S-promoting CDK/cyclins Reciprocal expression relationships denote divergent cell-cycle states in tumors Specific vulnerabilities are associated with different cell-cycle utilization Multiple separable mechanisms drive cell-cycle progression in tumor cells