DISCUSSION The cell cycle is a well-studied process, with significant data supporting both canonical CDK4/6-RB-CDK2 coupling and adaptations through which this pathway can be distorted. Here, using a broad panel of cell lines, we believe that it is apparent that there are multiple intrinsic cell-cycle states in cancer cells. While specific observations can be trivialized, such as the universal dependence on CDK1/CCNA2 or lack of impact of CDK3/CDK5, it should be noted that the literature is full of contradictory conclusions related to the functional significance of veritably all CDK/cyclins. Using clustering algorithms, cancer cells can be differentiated into at least 6 groups. Of these ~50% are dependent on CDK4 or CDK6 for proliferation. The dependence on CDK6 is differentiated through dependence on either cyclin D1 or cyclins D2 or D3. These dependencies are linked to the tissue of origin as well as genetic features of the cancer that arises. Ostensibly, the ‘‘tissue of origin dependencies’’ is at least partially reflective of normal tissue. For example, CDK6 and CCND2 and CCND3 play a larger role in hematopoiesis, and, correspondingly, leukemia, multiple myeloma, and lymphoma cell lines are more dependent on CDK6, CCND2, and CCND3 than on CDK4 or CCND1. Genetic features appear to be broadly dominant, as resistance to CDK4 or CDK6 can emerge in tumor cells of essentially any lineage with RB loss. Similarly, cyclin E amplification is associated with dependence on the CCNE1 gene, as is observed most frequently in gynecological malignancies. In spite of these generalizations, the heterogeneity of the cell cycle emerges as being particularly complex. There appear to be multiple functionally independent cell-cycle states that are operable across and within histological tumor types. In the context of breast cancer, there are clearly cell types (e.g., MCF7) that largely conform to a conventional cell cycle with strict dependence on CDK4/6. This can be bypassed by at least 3 mechanisms. First, cyclin E can bypass the requirement for CDK4/6, as shown in the MB157 model, wherein cyclin E drives RB phosphorylation. Second, it appears that in certain settings, as exemplified by the HCC1806 model, there is a complex dependence on cyclin D1 and CDK4/6 that does not conform to a simple standard paradigm. The HCC1806 model is highly dependent on cyclin D1, but resistant to CDK4/6 inhibitors. In this context, it appears that the depletion of cyclin D1 unleashes p27KIP1 and the suppression of CDK2 activity. The mechanism related to these complexes and switching of dependencies with knockdown will require further study and analysis of more cell models. For example, how cyclin E depletion results in the assembly of CDK4 complexes’ sensitivity to palbociclib in this model remains unclear. Furthermore, it is likely that other cell lines in this cluster are using different mechanisms to bypass the requirement for CDK4 or CDK6. This heterogeneity is reflected in the differential sensitivity of cells within this cluster to the CDK4/6 inhibitor palbociclib. Third, tumor cells that have lost RB are uniformly resistant to the depletion of CDK4 and CDK6, as well as cyclin D1. While the resistance to CDK4/6 inhibition is well documented, even RB-deficient tumor models have differing CDK and cyclin requirements. One subgrouping is clearly dependent on cyclin E. In this setting cyclin E is driving the phosphorylation of p130 to enable cell-cycle progression. However, there is another group that is largely resistant to the depletion of essentially all of the G1/S regulatory CDKs and cyclins. These models are still sensitive to CDK1 and CCNA2 depletion, suggesting a possible utilization of CDK1 to drive both G1/S and G2/M, as has been observed in mouse models. Interestingly, in cells that are cyclin E addicted, the deletion of RB is sufficient to enable proliferation with cyclin E knockdown. Thus, multiple complex dependencies are intrinsically operable across different tumor types. A challenge in the clinical use of CDK4/6 inhibitors has been the identification of predictive biomarkers. With unbiased approaches, it emerged that the most potent gene expression features associated with dependence on a CDK or a cyclin was essentially the expression levels of the target and other known members of the network in a reciprocal relationship. For example, cells that are dependent on cyclin D1 generally express high levels of cyclin D1 and RB1, but low levels of cyclin E and CDKN2A. These reciprocal relationships are apparent in both cell lines and primary tumors, suggesting that these states are pathologically relevant. These findings also challenge the canonical view that cyclin D1 is promoting the expression of cyclin E by derepressing E2F, which is one of the central precepts of the classical CDK4/6-RB pathway. From these relationships, it is possible to develop classifiers using logistic regression that are accurate in predicting the sensitivity to palbociclib. Such tools as shown here could be important in defining tumors with little or no benefit from CDK4/6 inhibitors, which remains a significant clinical issue. Targeting the cell cycle has emerged as a clinically significant regimen. However, as shown here, cell-cycle diversity and adaptations can limit the success of such approaches. Taking into consideration different cell-cycle states, we were able to identify genes and drugs that had a degree of selectivity. Gene networks indicate that different cell-cycle states are more dependent on specific functions. For example, CCNE1 high tumors are more sensitive to the depletion of DNA replication factors, PRC complex, and multiple additional epigenetic factors (e.g., CHAF1, EP300). These findings support potential vulnerabilities and avenues to treat such cancers. In contrast, CCND1 high tumors harbored vulnerabilities to metabolic genes (e.g., PGK1, ENO1) and other processes that could be similarly targeted or used in combination with CDK4/6 or other cytostatic agents. We also uncovered highly unexpected relationships, such as that CDKN2A high tumors exhibited vulnerability to TP53 depletion, which suggests a dependence of these tumor cells on the gain-of-function activity of mutant TP53. This finding is consistent with CDKN2A high cells being particularly resistant to MDM2/4 inhibitors. A feature of these analyses is that it would appear that fundamentally, high CCND1/RB1 and high CCNE1/CDKN2A tumors need to be treated differently. Cytostatic-acting therapies, notably MEK and CDK4/6 inhibitors, act selectively in CCND1/RB1 high tumors, and RB-deficient tumors remain resistant to not only single agent but also combination strategies, as observed in xenograft studies. In CCNE1/CDKN2A high tumors, cytotoxic agents that target the cell cycle (particularly WEE1 inhibitors) are more effective. In addition, it would appear that such tumors are primed toward apoptosis, as indicated by the increased sensitivity to Survivin and BCL2 inhibitors. This adds to an expanding literature that there are collateral vulnerabilities associated with cell-cycle deregulation or survival pathways that have been most studied in the context of RB loss. Given the universal requirement for some of these genes, using combinations it is possible to expand the therapeutic window and increase the selectivity for RB deficiency, as we show using isogenic models. Expanded analyses of these synergistic combinatorial approaches illustrate that the enhanced cell-cycle-specific targeted therapies can be used in tumor models (data not shown). Together, these data suggest that the intrinsically different cell-cycle states define tumors that should be treated in a distinct fashion with combinatorial strategies that expand upon cell-cycle dependencies and collateral vulnerabilities. Limitations of the study The data presented here emerged from the analyses of large publicly available datasets and biochemical functional analyses from a limited number of breast cancer cell lines. Further analyses will be required to determine the breadth of these findings in additional models and tumor types. Of particular importance will be determining whether normal cells that represent the cell of origin of a specific tumor type are in fact using these mechanisms for G1/S control or whether they are solely cancer specific. Another feature that remains under analysis is the potential need to target multiple cyclin or CDK genes in parallel to halt cell-cycle progression. We consider that this will be necessary to understand highly discordant cell cycles, as exemplified by the MB-468 cell line here. To fully develop gene expression determinants associated with the response to CDK4/6 inhibitors will require the utilization of patient cohorts. This represents a challenge as few patients are treated with CDK4/6 inhibitors as single agents, as assessed in the preclinical models described here. The cell-cycle states that are differentially defined by CCND1/RB or CCNE1/CDKN2A could be considerably more complex and conditioned by the contexts in which these genes are amplified or deleted. More study within a given tumor type and with the use of isogenic lines will be required to fully credential the genetic and therapeutic dependencies that are uncovered here. Furthermore, combination treatments that are particularly effective against RB-deficient or cyclin E-driven models will need to be validated in vivo and across more models to determine potential clinical validity.