Discussion The importance of a robust CD8+ T cell response in HIV-1 infection is highlighted by studies of elite suppressors (ES), who suppress viremia to undetectable levels without cART. The magnitude and characteristics of the CD8+ T cell response in ES, and the targeting of highly networked epitopes, have been implicated in their ability to control viral replication. These studies have led to efforts to stimulate CTLs in PLWH using therapeutic vaccination strategies for cure efforts. This has proven challenging, however, as HIV-1–specific CTLs in chronic progressors have a hypofunctional phenotype that is not completely restored by cART. HIV-1–specific CTLs also require prestimulation in order to clear infected cells after latency reversal. Retargeting strategies, such as the pMHC-I scDb strategy outlined above, are beneficial in that they enable CD8+ T cells of any specificity to recognize HIV-infected cells, thereby bypassing defects unique to the HIV-1–specific CTL subpopulation. Here we describe bispecific antibodies against HIV-1 pMHC-I expressed on infected cells. Bispecific antibodies capable of detecting rare HIV-1 pMHC complexes on infected cells might be useful in eradicating the latent reservoir following latency reversal. To identify target peptides, we used a highly sensitive MS method to quantitate HIV-1 peptides presented on MHC-I isolated from infected cells. Phage-bearing scFv specific for the identified pMHC-I were then isolated by panning from an extremely diverse library and cloned into an scDb backbone. Two scDbs, HA29 and HI12, exhibited high affinity and specificity for their respective pMHC targets. Subnanomolar concentrations of both scDbs induced polyfunctional CTL activation against T2 cells pulsed with peptides in the 0.1 to 10 nM range. Prior studies involving single-molecule immunofluorescence using an affinity-matured TCR against a melanoma pMHC suggest that peptide concentrations of 0.1 to 10 nM should result in the presentation of physiological levels of pMHC (4 to 80 copies per cell). Since the HA29 and HI12 bispecific antibodies enabled CD8+ T cell recognition of cells pulsed with 0.1 nM peptide, we predicted these antibodies could detect endogenously processed epitopes on infected cells. When HA29- and HI12-scDbs were incubated with CTLs and newly infected CD4+ T cells, HA29-scDb suppressed viral infection in a 72-h coculture. In contrast, the HI12-scDb did not, consistent with the lower copy number of the ILK epitope as quantitated by MS (greater than one copy of ILK/HLA-A*02:01 per cell). Pulsing infected cells with the ILK peptide and then coculturing them with CTLs led to dramatic suppression/killing, implicating low antigen density as the primary factor preventing HI12-induced killing. Our results are consistent with prior studies. Tsomides et al. generated a stable, HLA-A2+ Jurkat cell line carrying a nef-deficient HIV-1 provirus and estimated the ILK pMHC density at ∼10 copies per cell. An ILK-specific T cell clone required very high (i.e., 50:1) E:T ratios to promote killing of the cell line. If the density of ILK on cells constitutively expressing HIV-1 protein and A2 levels is only ∼10 copies, it follows that in the setting of natural infection, presentation of ILK on the cell surface would be even lower. ILK is derived from the RT protein, which is expressed at only 10% of the level of the more abundant Gag protein due to a ribosomal frame shift required for RT translation, but this alone is not sufficient to explain the low levels of ILK. The ALT peptide, found at 54 copies per cell, derives from the same protein. Thus, the difference between the RT ALT and ILK copy numbers (54 vs. <1 per cell) may reflect differences in processing. Although the two epitopes are located within 12 residues of each other, ALT (amino acids 290 to 298) is located on an extruded loop of RT and contains one residue of an α-helix that precedes ILK (amino acids 309 to 317). ILK is located at the C-terminal end of the same constrained α-helix that separates these two epitopes. The entire 17-amino acid helix is likely less easily unfolded, and thus may impact translocation through the proteosome or protein cleavage to diminish the generation of the downstream ILK epitope. Importantly, other factors may also contribute to the efficacy of the scDb approach describe here. In addition to peptide affinity for the relevant MHC molecule, these include the effect of flanking residues on cleavage by the proteasome and also other amino peptidases, such as ERAP1 and ERAP2, TAP transport, association with molecular chaperones, and stability of the complexes. Our results highlight the need to reexamine the optimal CTL epitopes for viral control in the context of antigen density. Most studies have analyzed the conservation of CTL epitopes. Recently, network analysis has identified epitopes that are mutationally constrained. The consensus is that targeting highly conserved or mutationally constrained epitopes would be therapeutically beneficial. However, highly conserved epitopes, such as ILK, may not be presented at sufficient levels to serve as appropriate targets. Responses to the ILK epitope were first observed using T cell clones from asymptomatic HIV+ individuals that lysed autologous cells infected with vaccinia vectors expressing HIV-1 genes. However, vaccinia infection may produce proportionally more viral pMHC than would occur from natural HIV-1 infection. Many cure strategies aim to target HIV-1 Env on the surface of infected cells. However, Env has an extremely high sequence diversity. Broadly neutralizing antibodies (bNAbs) address this issue and have been reformatted to include anti-CD3 domains to engage T cells. However, anti-Env bNAbs can drive selective pressure and the cell-surface levels of HIV-1 Env are low on infected cells. Anti-pMHC scDbs could synergize with anti-Env scDbs to enhance CTL killing of infected cells following latency-reversal, providing a complementary arm for the “kill” in shock-and-kill efforts. There are several potential benefits to using pMHC-specific scDbs in the situation where latency has been successfully reversed in the context of a shock-and-kill strategy. The large diversity of targets against which scDbs can be generated throughout the viral proteome provides a level of versatility that anti-Env bNAbs do not offer. A “cocktail” of bispecific engagers—targeting conserved pMHC presented at relatively high copy numbers from various viral proteins—could trigger CTL-mediated lysis of infected cells in a manner that would preclude viral evasion from any one scDb. Although the scDbs described here showed high affinity and specificity for the target pMHC, higher concentrations of the scDbs exhibited some nonspecific activity against irrelevant targets. Higher affinity and specificity could be achieved by additional scFv selection using affinity-matured libraries. The same methodology can be extended to other HLA alleles to increase the population coverage. SIV antigens in infected cells may be processed and presented using alternative pathways on MHC-II and HLA-E. As HLA-E is nearly monomorphic, targeting a conserved HIV-1 peptide bound to HLA-E using the above approach may provide a nearly universal bispecific reagent. Thus, the strategies described here could be used to isolate scFv specific for nonclassically presented HIV-1 peptides. Another benefit of scDb is that they induce CTL activation even at low antigen densities, as seen from our peptide-pulsing experiments. Given the variability in LRA-mediated reactivation of latent HIV-1, repeated infusions of scDbs might be required to reduce the latent reservoir. Whether scDb are able to activate CTLs better than natural recognition by αβTCRs remains to be seen. Contrary to conventional receptor–ligand interactions exemplified by antigen–antibody binding, bioforces are essential for nonthermal equilibrium, mechanosensor-based αβT cell activation. αβT cell motility during immune surveillance and the local cytoskeletal machinery place physical load on individual αβTCR-pMHC bonds, tuning the sensitivity and specificity of αβTCR recognition. In the absence of external load, chemical thresholds to trigger cellular αβT cell activation require a 1,000-fold or higher number of pMHC molecules than observed physiologically. In contrast, under force the ligand-mediated induction of αβT cell biological response can be essentially digital (i.e., single pMHC recognition). That said, it remains to be seen how soluble bispecific reagents versus digitally performing αβTCRs used for adoptive cellular immunotherapy compare head-to-head in detection of the same pMHC ligand on target cells to effectuate specific killing. Clustering of bispecific reagents, perhaps on nanoparticle arrays, could potentially increase sensitivity. There are potential limitations to the use of bispecific antibodies to eliminate HIV-1–infected cells in HIV-1 cure strategies. It is possible that the bispecific antibodies will be immunogenic and induce antidrug antibodies that will limit their effectiveness. The bispecifics described here were generated using scFv phage-display libraries based on a humanized antibody. The extent to which the development of antidrug antibodies will limit the effectiveness of this approach will likely become apparent when these approaches, which are being rapidly developed for cancer immunotherapy, are more fully evaluated in clinical trials. It is also important to emphasize that the bispecific reagents described here can only eliminate infected cells that are actively expressing HIV-1 genes and producing the relevant HIV-1 proteins. These reagents have no ability to reverse HIV-1 latency and can only promote the elimination of latently infected cells if HIV-1 gene expression is first induced by effective LRAs. The discovery of LRAs that induce viral gene expressing in a large fraction of reservoir cells is a problem that has not yet been solved despite extensive effort in many laboratories. Many of the LRAs identified to date using model systems fail to reverse latency in ex vivo studies with resting CD4+ T cells from treated PLWH. Therefore, a successful cure strategy will likely require the discovery of more effective LRAs that will complement the killing strategy described here. In addition, the persistence of HIV-1 in macrophages and in T cells subsets that are localized to tissues sites not readily penetrated by CTL (such as germinal centers) may pose additional barriers to the elimination of infected cells. Furthermore, reservoir cells may have been selected for intrinsic resistance to CTL killing. It is also important to note that many reservoir viruses contain escape mutations in immunodominant CTL epitopes. Fortunately, mutations are generally absent in subdominant epitopes, allowing targeting of infected cells. Finally, CTL dysfunction associated with the expression of PD1 may persist in the setting of ART. However, the exhausted phenotype is found on HIV-1–specific CTL and to a much less extent on CTL specific for other antigens. An advantage of the strategy described here is that it enables CTLs of any specificity to kill HIV-1–infected target cells. The complications described above may contribute to the finding that shock-and-kill strategies have yet to produce substantial decrease in the latent reservoir in animal models. However, there is evidence for a delay in viral rebound after ART interruption in simian immunodeficiency virus-infected macaques that received both an immune stimulant with potential LRA activity (TLR7 agonist) coupled with immunologic interventions (bNAbs or therapeutic vaccination). The small signal observed in these studies provides hope that cure may be possible with better LRAs and more effective killing strategies, possibly including the one described here. To our knowledge, no other studies have described the generation and use of TCRm-antibodies against HIV pMHC to target latent HIV infection. We have identified naturally processed targets on infected cells and generated reagents using phage display that could recognize and kill infected cells. Our studies highlight the importance of antigen density in the design of therapeutic vaccines and immunotherapies, and lay the groundwork for future studies that aim to eliminate the latent reservoir using bispecific cell engagers.