Discussion The results reported here indicate that the cTnI gene promoter is actively repressed in cultured skeletal muscle cells and in regenerating adult skeletal muscle by factors that binds GATA elements. Both mutation and deletion of GATA elements in the cTnI promoter strongly up-regulate promoter activity in skeletal muscle cells. In addition, EMSA experiments show that 1) nuclear extracts of muscle cells contain proteins that form specific complexes with GATA elements present in the cTnI promoter, and 2) these proteins do not correspond to GATA-2, -3 and -4, the only GATA transcripts expressed in skeletal muscle cells. The nature of the GATA-like factor(s) responsible for the repression of the cTnI promoter in skeletal muscle cells thus remains to be established. A role of GATA elements in the regulation of skeletal muscle gene promoters has been previously proposed. Mutation of a GATA motif in the myosin light chain 3 promoter was found to attenuate its activity in primary cultures of neonatal rat skeletal muscle, however, the nature of the factor(s) binding to this site was not determined. Deletion of a GATA binding sequence in the dihydropyridine-sensitive receptor (DHPR) α1 subunit promoter leads to reduction in promoter activity and antisense experiments for GATA-2 induced functional changes in L-type calcium channels which are consistent with decreased expression of α1. However, direct interation of GATA2 with DHPR promoter was not demonstrated. An interaction between GATA factors and MyoD in the regulation of the FGF4 gene promoter in embryonic myotomes has also been described. However, EMSA assays were performed in HeLa cells and no evidence was presented for the presence of GATA factors in the myotomes. Thus direct evidence for the presence of GATA factors in nuclear extracts of skeletal muscle cells was not reported in these studies. GATA factors are best known as transcriptional activators and inducers of cell differentiation. However, several studies indicate that they can also act as transcriptional repressors in different cell systems, including heart, adipose tissue and erythroid cells. Proteins distinct from canonical GATA transcription factors can also bind GATA elements and inhibit gene expression. The ubiquitous nuclear DNA binding protein Ku70 was shown to have a repressor activity in the transcriptional regulation of the GBP and KEL promoters by binding WGATAG, but not WGATAA elements. However, it is unlikely that Ku70 is responsible for the repression of the cTnI promoter in skeletal muscle since all of the GATA elements in the cTnI promoter have a GATAA consensus sequence. GATA-like protein-1 (GPL-1), which is expressed at high levels in the somatic cells of the developing gonads, but not in skeletal muscle, acts as a transcriptional repressor of GATA factor function. In conclusion, our results suggest that the transcription of cTnI gene is actively repressed in skeletal muscle cells by proteins binding to GATA motifs in the proximal promoter. The finding that the transcription of the cTnI gene promoter is actively repressed in skeletal muscle cells raises the possibility that under certain conditions this inhibitory mechanisms may be relieved and cTnI transcription may take place also in skeletal muscle. Indeed, cTnI mRNA has been detected in skeletal muscle biopsies of patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy at the mRNA level though not at the protein level. 