Methods Plasmid constructs The -230/+16 cTnI promoter linked to chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) and the mutated constructs have been described. Deletion of the two GATA elements (-67/-57) was obtained by double PCR as described. Briefly, the cTnI promoter was amplified in two separate reactions: from -230 to -67 and from -56 to +16 with the oligos -67 and the -56 designed with a partial overlap. Each PCR product was gel purified and combined in an equimolar ratio. Three cycles without primers were performed, and subsequently 20 cycles of PCR were performed with addition of the 5'-upstream and 3'-downstream primers. The final amplified product was digested with HindIII and SalI and cloned into the plasmid pCAT enhancer (Promega). The construct was confirmed by sequencing. Muscle regeneration and in vivo transfection Male Wistar rats (200–250 g) were anesthetized with Isoflurane (FORANE, Abbott SpA) at 1–1.5% with oxygen. The rat soleus muscle was exposed and muscle degeneration/regeneration was induced by injecting 0.5% bupivacaine (Marcaine) in saline solution. Intramuscular injection of plasmid DNA (50 μg) was performed at day 3 after bupivacaine treatment as described previously. Muscles were removed at 7 days after injury and frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen. Animals were kept in conventional facilities with free access to food and water. Adequate care for their health and well-being was provided in accordance with the Italian Animal Act (Law 116/92). These studies were conducted under the supervision of the Institutional Ethics Committee. Muscle cell cultures and transfections Primary cultures of cardiac and skeletal muscle cells were prepared from neonatal rat heart and hind limb muscles as described previously. Skeletal muscle cells were grown for 3 days in DMEM supplemented with 20% fetal calf serum, 2% glutamine and 12.5 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin, then transfected with 10 μg of the cTnI-CAT constructs and 1 μg of CMV-lacZ, as an internal control. After 24 h, the cells were induced to differentiate by changing the medium to DMEM supplemented with 4% horse serum, 2% glutamine, 12.5 U/ml of penicillin-streptomycin. The cultures were harvested after 2 days in the differentiation medium. A similar procedure was used to obtain differentiated cultured from C2C12 cells. CAT assays Muscles were homogenized in 200 μl ice-cold lysis solution containing 100 mM potassium phosphate pH 7.8, 0.1% triton and 1 mM dithiothreitol (added just before use). Tissues were homogenized with an Ultra Turax T25. The homogenates were centrifuged at 10.000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C; the supernatants were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. CAT activity was assayed by TLC scintillation counts as described. Values (means ± S.E.) were expressed as fold increase in CAT activity over the promoterless construct. Each construct was tested in 4 to 8 independent experiments. For muscle cell cultures β-Galactosidase and chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) assays were performed with 25 μl of muscle cell lysate. Values (means ± S.E.) were expressed as fold increase in normalized CAT activity over the promoterless construct. Each construct was tested in 3 to 5 independent experiments. Real-time RT-PCR For real-time PCR assays, total RNA was prepared from C2C12 myotubes with SV Total RNA Isolation reagent (Promega). 400 ng of RNA was converted to cDNA using random hexamers and Superscript II (Invitrogen). PCR amplification was performed with an IQ5 real time PCR system (BioRad) using SYBR green. The primers were designed to span an intronic sequence and were validated by PCR and gel analysis. Primer sequences were as follows (forward & reverse): GATA-1 F: 5' GCTCAGCAGCCTATTCTTCC 3' R: 5' CGTTGCTCCACAGTTCACAC 3' GATA-2 F: 5' ACGCCTGTGGCCTCTACTAC 3' R: 5' GGATTTGCTGGACATCTTCC 3' GATA-3 F: 5' ACCACGTCCCGTCCTACTAC 3' R: 5' AGAGATCCGTGCAGCAGAG 3' GATA-4 F: 5' CTGTCATCTCACTATGGGCAC 3' R: 5' CCAAGTCCGAGCAGGAATTTG 3' GATA-5 F: 5' TTTGAAGGCAGAGTCCAGTC 3' R: 5' AGGCAAAGTCTTCAGGTTCG 3' GATA-6 F: 5' TTCTACACAAGCGACCACCTC 3' R: 5' GCCGTCTTGACCTGAATACTT 3' The data were normalized using oligonucleotide primers for cyclophilin A as an internal standard. Western blotting Nuclear extracts (20 μg) from C2C12 myotubes or other cell types were separated by SDS-PAGE using 8% gels and blots were incubated with monoclonal antibodies specific for GATA-2, -3, -4 and a polyclonal antibody specific for MEF2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.). Antibody binding was revealed by use of SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce). Gel Mobility Shift Assay DNA/protein reactions and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) were performed as described using 0.3 ng of cTnI GATA radiolabeled probe, 1 μg of poly (dI·dC)-poly(dI·dC) (Amersham-Pharmacia Biotech) and a 50–100-fold excess of competitor DNA. We used 2 μg of nuclear extracts from C2C12 muscle cells and either Jurkat cells (Geneka) or cultured cardiomyocytes. Supershift assays were performed with antibodies specific for GATA-2, -3 or -4 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc.). The antibodies were added to the DNA/nuclear extract mix, and the binding was allowed to proceed for 1 hour before loading the samples. The oligonucleotides used for these experiments, including one specific for GATA sequences from the BNP promoter, are listed in Table 1. Data analysis Data are expressed as means ± SE (represented as error bars). Comparisons were made using the Student's t test, considering P < 0.05 statistically significant. 